     Context aware Calculation and Deduction
         Ring Equalities via Gröbner Bases in Isabelle

                      Amine Chaieb and Makarius Wenzel

                           Technische Universität München
       Institut für Informatik, Boltzmannstraße 3, 85748 Garching, Germany


      Abstract. We address some aspects of a proposed system architecture
      for mathematical assistants, integrating calculations and deductions by
      common infrastructure within the Isabelle theorem proving environment.
      Here calculations may refer to arbitrary extra-logical mechanisms, oper-
      ating on the syntactic structure of logical statements. Deductions are
      devoid of any computational content, but driven by procedures external
      to the logic, following to the traditional “LCF system approach”. The lat-
      ter is extended towards explicit dependency on abstract theory contexts,
      with separate mechanisms to interpret both logical and extra-logical con-
      tent uniformly. Thus we are able to implement proof methods that oper-
      ate on abstract theories and a range of particular theory interpretations.
      Our approach is demonstrated in Isabelle/HOL by a proof-procedure for
      generic ring equalities via Gröbner Bases.


1   Introduction
The requirements for mathematical assistants come in various and sometimes
conflicting flavors: efficient calculations (computer algebra systems have excelled
here), deduction with a precise notion of logical correctness (the theorem prov-
ing approach), and ability to work relative to abstract theory contexts as in
traditional mathematics. In the present paper we address the issue of combining
calculations and deductions with theory abstraction and interpretation in the
Isabelle theorem proving environment [14]. Since calculations are external to the
logic, we may employ arbitrary programming techniques, with full access to the
syntactic structure of statements. Deductions are driven by such external proce-
dures, to replay proofs via primitive inferences, following the traditional “LCF
system approach” of correctness-by-construction introduced by Milner [7].
    Proof methods are typically inhomogeneous because of a natural division of
computing results vs. checking witnesses within the logic. From the algorithmic
perspective it is usually harder to produce a result than to check it, e.g. consider
long division of polynomials. From the logical point of view, results may emerge
spontaneously by an external “oracle”, but checking requires tedious inferences.
    Implementing proof tools by orchestrating non-trivial calculations and de-
ductions is a difficult task. In providing a link to abstract theory mechanisms we
contribute to systematic development of advanced methods, being organized ac-
cording to the logical context required at each stage. Thus we transfer principles
of modular program and theory development towards proof procedures.
Related work. There are mainly two other approaches in implementing proof
procedures in theorem proving environments: interpretation and assimilation.
    Interpretation means that the proof system provides a specific language for
describing procedures, being interpreted at run-time and reduced to basic in-
ferences eventually. This language is usually limited to common expressions for
combining terms, theorems, tactics etc. Even if it is made computationally com-
plete, there is normally no access to arbitrary libraries and components of the
underlying implementation platform. For example, see Ltac in Coq [3], or the
language of macetes in IMPS [6]. The latter is also notable due to its integration
with the concept of “little theories”, by means of transportable macetes.
    Assimilation means that powerful computational concepts (such as algebraic
datatypes, recursive functions) are integrated into the very logical environment
itself. Calculations are then native reductions of the underlying calculus, as in
the type-theory of Coq [3], which augments plain syntactic αβ-reduction by
δι-reduction (expansion of simple and inductive definitions). Advanced imple-
mentation techniques for functional programming language are assimilated into
the Coq inference kernel, in order to achieve reasonable performance.
    This unified approach of calculations and deductions (also called “computa-
tional reflection”) looks very attractive at first sight: various proof tools have
been implemented like this [8, 5]. On the other hand, there is some extra te-
dium involved, because all manipulations need to be formalized within the logic.
First this requires facilities to quote (or “reify”) logical statements in order to
access their syntactic structure. Then fully formal correctness proofs need to be
provided, to get manipulated statements interpreted back into the logic.
    An important point of the “LCF approach” is to allow arbitrary manipula-
tions without requiring quoting or formally proven programs — correctness is
achieved by checking the logically relevant bits at run-time. There are numerous
procedures implemented in HOL Light [10]; see also [11] for particular applica-
tions involving Computer Algebra Systems as search oracles for HOL proofs.

Basic notation. Keywords like theorem, locale, interpretation etc. refer to
Isabelle theory elements. Types and terms are embedded here as smaller units,
and notation approximates mathematical conventions despite a bias towards λ-
calculus. Types τ consist of type variables α, type constants like nat or int, or
function spaces τ 1 ⇒ τ 2 . Terms t consist of variables x, constants c, abstractions
λx . t, or applications t 1 t 2 . Propositions are terms of type prop, with the outer-
most
V      logical rule structure represented via implication A =⇒ B, or quantification
  x . B, where outermost quantifiers are implicit.
    Mathematical functions A → B are approximated by computable functions
implemented in SML. We use “curried” notation uniformly for iterated appli-
cations: f x y for f : A → B → C and x : A and y : B. This is particularly
important for partial application, such as f x : B → C, which requires another
argument y : B to continue evaluation. Despite some similarities in notation, a
plain mathematical function (x 7→ f x ) : A → B should not be confused with a
symbolic term (λx . t x ) : α ⇒ β within the logical framework!


                                          2
Overview. In §2 we present a simple example of calculating with (semi)ring
numerals. In §3 we introduce the general principles of contexts and context
declarations in Isabelle. In §4 we review some aspects of Isabelle’s Simplifier
that use the context infrastructure to implement facilities shown in the example.
In §5 we report on a larger application, a proof method for ring equalities via
Gröbner Bases.


2     Example: calculations on generic numerals
Our main application (cf. §5) operates on general semiring and ring structures in
non-trivial ways. In order to illustrate the integration of proof methods with ab-
stract theory mechanisms of Isabelle, we merely consider the trivial sub-problem
of representing constants (abstract numerals) adequately, such that basic calcu-
lations (addition, subtraction etc.) can be performed efficiently.
    We shall be using Isabelle locales [12, 1, 2] which provide a general concept
for abstracting over operations with certain properties. Locales are similar to the
“little theories” of IMPS [6], but based on pure predicate definitions together
with some infrastructure to manage Isabelle/Isar proof contexts [17].
    Existing calculational tools in Isabelle [15] use the more restricted mechanism
of axiomatic type classes [16], where the only parameter is the underlying type,
but the signature is fixed. According to [9], type-classes may be understood as
particular locale interpretations, where the variable parameters are replaced by
polymorphic constants — fixing everything except the underlying type. Thus
our general locale-based proof methods will be able to cover type-classes as well.


2.1   Semirings
A semiring provides operations ⊕, , 0, 1 over type α, with the usual laws for
associativity, commutativity, and distributivity etc.
locale semiring =
  fixes add :: α ⇒ α ⇒ α (infixl ⊕ 65)
    and mul :: α ⇒ α ⇒ α (infixl    70)
    and zero :: α (0) and one :: α (1)
  assumes add-a: (x ⊕ y) ⊕ z = x ⊕ (y ⊕ z )
    and add-c: x ⊕ y = y ⊕ x
    and add-0: 0 ⊕ x = x and . . .
We shall single out canonical semiring expressions as “constants”, corresponding
to non-negative natural numbers. To achieve an efficient binary representation,
we postulate an operation bit for shifting a least-significant 0 or 1:
locale semiring-bin = semiring +
  fixes bit :: α ⇒ bool ⇒ α
  assumes bit-def : bit x b = x ⊕ x ⊕ (if b then 1 else 0)
We can now represent numerals compactly using binary representation according
to the recursive definition numeral = 0 | 1 | bit numeral False | bit numeral True


                                          3
(excluding leading zeros). E.g. 6 is represented as binary bit (bit 1 True) False
instead of unary 1 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 1 ⊕ 1. The syntax machinery of Isabelle can
be modified to support human-readable (decimal) notation; we shall use #digits
for this purpose. Then the term #6 will stand for the previous binary expression.
Symbolic calculation on numerals means to manipulate canonical expressions
such that proven equalities emerge in the end. For example, addition is easily
implemented as a strongly-normalizing term rewrite system:
theorem (in semiring-bin) binary-add :
 x ⊕0=x
 0⊕x =x
 1 ⊕ 1 = bit 1 False
 bit x False ⊕ 1 = bit x True
 bit x True ⊕ 1 = bit (add x 1) False
 1 ⊕ bit x False = bit x True
 1 ⊕ bit x True = bit (add x 1) False
 bit x False ⊕ bit y False = bit (x ⊕ y) False
 bit x False ⊕ bit y True = bit (x ⊕ y) True
 bit x True ⊕ bit y False = bit (x ⊕ y) True
 bit x True ⊕ bit y True = bit (x ⊕ y ⊕ 1) False
Isabelle’s Simplifier depends on rewrite rules declared in the context as [simp].
The proof method simp derives equalities according to a bottom-up strategy,
effectively simulating strict functional evaluation with proven results t = t 0.
declare (in semiring-bin) binary-add [simp]
We can now prove equations involving addition of abstract numerals, e.g.:
theorem (in semiring-bin) #48734 ⊕ #3762039758274 = #3762039807008
 by simp
The same works for various interpretations of the abstract context, e.g. for type
nat with the usual operations +, ∗, 0, 1, and bit-nat being defined separately:
definition bit-nat n b = n + n + (if b then (1::nat) else (0::nat))
interpretation semiring-bin [(op +) (op ∗) 0 1 bit-nat] hproof i
Now the background context contains corresponding instances of the semi-ring
locale content (e.g. for type nat), including binary-add with the [simp] declara-
tion. This allows to calculate on interpreted nat numerals as follows:
theorem #48734 + #3762039758274 = #3762039807008
 by simp
Multiplication on numerals is handled by the very same technique.


2.2   Ring numerals
The subsequent locale ring-bin extends semirings with subtraction and negation.
Our particular axioms are not an abstract algebraic characterization, but express
the requirements of the proof method introduced later.


                                          4
locale ring-bin = semiring-bin +
  fixes sub :: α ⇒ α ⇒ α (infixl   65)
    and neg :: α ⇒ α ( - [81] 80)
  assumes neg-mul : ( 1)     x =   x
    and sub-add [simp]: x   y = x ⊕ ( y)
    and add-neg: z ⊕ y = x =⇒ x ⊕ ( y) = z
Canonical expressions for signed numerals are defined as numeral |    numeral
(excluding negated zeros). For symbolic computation, subtraction is reduced to
negation and addition immediately, and negations are normalized as follows:
theorem (in ring-bin) neg-norm [simp]:
   0=0
   ( x) = x
 ( x ) ⊕ ( y) =     (x ⊕ y)
This reduces signed addition to x ⊕ ( y) or ( y) ⊕ x, where x and y are
unsigned semiring numerals. The result is either some z or       z, depending on
the sign of the difference of x and y. These cases are covered by diff-rules:
theorem (in ring-bin) diff-rules:
 z ⊕ x = y =⇒ x ⊕ ( y) =          z
 z ⊕ x = y =⇒ ( y) ⊕ x =          z
 z ⊕ y = x =⇒ x ⊕ ( y) = z
 z ⊕ y = x =⇒ ( y) ⊕ x = z
Here z needs to be produced separately in order to apply these rules effectively.
Checking the preconditions afterwards works by term rewriting, but comput-
ing z the same way would be slightly awkward (requiring auxiliary construc-
tions within the logical context, like twos-complement binary numerals). Instead
we shall now use the existing programming environment of SML to work out
signed addition (including negation and subtraction). Converting symbolic ex-
pressions back and forth to SML integers is straight-forward, by providing func-
tions dest-binary and mk-binary. The remaining task is to test the result and
instruct the logical engine to apply an appropriate diff-rules case.
The subsequent simproc-setup declaration augments the Simplifier context by
a function that proves rewrite rules on the fly (depending on the current redex):
simproc-setup (in ring-bin) binary-sub (x ⊕ ( y) | ( y) ⊕ x ) = (fn ϕ 7→
  let
    val [rule 1 , rule 2 , rule 3 , rule 4 ] = ϕ diff-rules
    val int-of = dest-binary ϕ val of-int = mk-binary ϕ
    val add = ϕ (op ⊕) val add-conv = Simplifier .rewrite (ϕ binary-add )
  in fn (@{term add t u}) 7→
      let
        val x = int-of t val y = int-of u
        val z = x + y val v = of-int (abs z )
        val (w , rule) =
          if z < 0 then if y < 0 then (t, rule 1 ) else (u, rule 2 )
          else if y < 0 then (operand-of u, rule 3 ) else (operand-of t, rule 4 )
      in rule OF [add-conv (@{term add v w )] end
  end)


                                           5
Everything depends on a morphism ϕ that provides the view of abstract entities
from ring-bin in the particular application context. In the first stage, the pro-
cedure applies ϕ to all required logical entities of ring-bin, notably terms and
theorems. In the second stage it operates on the particular problem, accepting
a term add t u and producing a proven result involving another term add v w.
We may now establish equalities for abstract and concrete numerals:
theorem (in ring-bin) #48734      #3762039758274 =       #3762039709540
 by simp

definition bit-int i b = i + i + (if b then (1::int) else (0::int))
interpretation ring-bin [(op +) (op ∗) 0 1 bit-int (op −) uminus] hproof i

theorem #48734 − #3762039758274 = − #3762039709540
 by simp

The same technique also works for more complex calculations, such as div /mod.


3      Contexts and declarations
3.1     Generic contexts

Isabelle supports two notions of context: theory for large-scale library organiza-
tion, and proof context as medium-scale reasoning infrastructure for structured
proofs [17] and structured specifications [12, 1, 2, 9]. Here we present a unified
view of generic contexts that covers the common characteristics of both kinds.
    In primitive inferences Γ ` A means that A is derivable within a context
Γ , which typically contains fixed variables and assumptions. We generalize this
idea towards a container for arbitrary logical and extra-logical data, including
background theory declarations (types, constants, axioms), local parameters and
assumptions, definitions and theorems, syntax and type-inference information,
hints for automated proof tools (e.g. the Simplifier, arithmetic procedures) etc.
      There are two main logical operations on generic contexts:

 1. Context construction starts with an empty context Γ 0 and proceeds by
    adding further context elements consecutively. In particular, Γ + fix x de-
    clares a local variable, and Γ + assume A states a local assumption.
 2. Context export destructs the logical difference of two contexts, by imposing
    it on local results. The effect of export Γ 1 Γ 2 is to discharge portions of the
    context on terms and theorems as follows:
      export (Γ + fix x ) Γ (t x )     = (λxV
                                            . t x)
      export (Γ + fix x ) Γ (` B x )   = (` x . B x )
      export (Γ + assume A) Γ (A ` B ) = (` A =⇒ B )
      Discharging assumptions on syntactic terms has no effect.




                                         6
3.2     Context data
Isabelle belongs to the tradition of “LCF-style” provers, which is centered around
formally checked entities being implemented as abstract datatypes. All values of
such types being produced at run-time are “correct by construction” — relative
to the correctness of a few core modules. For example, certified terms may be
composed by syntax primitives to produce again certified terms; likewise theo-
rems are composed by primitive rules to produce new theorems.
    We extend this principle towards an abstract type of well-formed proof con-
texts, with additional support for type-safe additions of context data at compile
time. Internally, context data consists of an inhomogeneous record of individ-
ual data slots (based on dynamically typed disjoint sums). The external pro-
gramming interface recovers strong static typing by means of an SML functor,
involving dependently-typed modules, functor Data(ARGS ): RESULT, where:
        ARGS = sig type T val init: T end
      RESULT = sig val put: T → context → context val get: context → T end
For example, the inference kernel requires a table of axioms, which is declared
by structure Axioms = Data(type T = (name × term) list val init = []). The
resulting operations Axioms.put: (name × term) list → context → context and
Axioms.get: context → (name × term) list are kept private to the kernel im-
plementation, exposing only interfaces for adding axioms strictly monotonically,
and for turning named axioms into theorems. Thus abstract datatype integrity
can be maintained, according to the “LCF system approach”.
   Slightly less critical applications of the same mechanism involve automated
proof tools that depend on “hints” in the context, such as the Simplifier (cf. §4).


3.3     Morphisms
In general a morphism is just abstract non-sense to organize certain logical oper-
ations. The idea is that a morphism determines how results may be transferred
into another context, providing a different view of previous results.
    Formally, a morphism ϕ is a tuple (ϕtype , ϕterm , ϕthm ) of mappings on
types, terms, and theorems, respectively. ϕ0 refers to the identity morphism. We
write uniformly ϕ τ for some type τ , and ϕ t for some term t, and ϕ th for some
theorem th, meaning that the appropriate component is applied. Usually mor-
phisms respect the overall syntactic structure of arguments, by mapping types
within terms uniformly etc. Then the full morphism ϕ is already determined by
the ϕthm part, since types and terms are sub-structurally included in thm.
    A morphism is called well-formed, if it preserves logical well-formedness of its
arguments. This desirable property may be achieved in practice by composing
morphisms from basic operations of the inference kernel. For example, a mor-
phism consisting of primitive inference rules (e.g. for instantiation of variables)
will map theorems again to theorems by construction.
    The following two kinds of morphism, which resemble abstraction and appli-
cation in λ-calculus or type-theory, are particularly important in practice.


                                         7
1. Export morphism: the export operation between two contexts (cf. §3.1) de-
   termines a well-formed morphism ϕ = export Γ 1 Γ 2 . By this view, local
   results (with fixed variables and assumptions) appear in generalized form
   (with arbitrary variables and discharged premises).
2. Interpretation morphism: given concrete terms for the fixed variables, and
   theorems for the assumptions of a context, the substitution operation de-
   termines a well-formed morphism ϕ = interpret [t/x ] [th/A]. By this view,
   results of an abstract theory are turned into concrete instances.



3.4     Generic declarations
Ultimately we would like to view arbitrary context data after morphism applica-
tion, but doing this directly turns out as unsatisfactory — essentially violating
abstract datatype integrity. This could be amended by incorporating morphisms
into the generic data interface (cf. §3.2), but then implementations would be-
come more complicated due to additional invariants (e.g. consider efficient term
index structures in the presence of arbitrary morphisms).
    Instead, we handle morphisms at the level of data declarations. Recalling that
arbitrary datatypes can be incorporated into the generic context, any operation
on data is subsumed by context → context. This motivates the our definition:
      declaration = morphism → context → context
This means a declaration participates in applying the morphism: being passed
some ϕ as additional argument it is supposed to apply it to any logical param-
eters (types, terms, theorems) involved in its operation. Note that immediate
declaration in the current context works by passing the identity morphism ϕ0 .
    A fact declaration is represented as a theorem-attribute pair. This is an im-
portant special case; the general declaration is recovered by the apply operation:
      fact-declaration = thm × attribute
             attribute = thm → context → context
       apply (th, att) = (ϕ 7→ att (ϕ th))
Observe that th is transformed separately before invoking the attribute. Here the
internal operation does not have to consider morphisms at all.
    The Isabelle syntax for (th, att) is “th [att]”, which may appear wherever
facts occur, as in “theorem th [att]: A” or “declare th [att]”. General declara-
tions are written as “declaration d ”, for d : morphism → context → context.


3.5     Locales
Locales [12] provide a high-level mechanism to organize proof context elements
and declarations (cf. §3.4). Locale expressions [1] compose existing locales by
means of merge and rename operations. Locale interpretation [2] transfers re-
sults stemming from a locale into another context. Type-classes [16] express


                                        8
properties of polymorphic entities within the type-system; there is a canoni-
cal interpretation of classes as specific locales [9]. These building-blocks provide
a medium-scale module concept on top of the existing Isabelle logic — locale
operations are reduced to basic inferences (usually expressed via morphisms).
    A locale specification consists of the following two distinctive parts.

 1. Assumptions refer to fixed types, terms, and hypotheses. The latter two are
    specified explicitly by the notation “fixes x ” and “assumes A x ”; types are
    maintained implicitly according to occurrences in the given formulae.
    The assumption part determines the logical meaning of a locale, which is
    expressed as predicate definition together with a context construction: the
    definition “locale c = fixes x assumes A x ” produces a predicate constant
    c = (λx . A x ), and a context construction Γ + fix x assume A x.
 2. Conclusions are essentially theorems that depend on the locale context and
    are adjoined to the locale later on, without changing the logical meaning.
    The notation “(in c)” may be added to various theory elements (notably
    theorem) to indicate that the result is established within the context of c,
    and stored there for later use. Fact declarations may be included, too.

    The conclusion part is what really matters in practical use, including dec-
larations of arbitrary extra-logical data. The locale infrastructure maintains a
canonical order of declarations d 1 , . . ., d n . Whenever the locale context is re-
constructed later, relative to a morphism ϕ, the context will be augmented by
the collective declaration of d n ϕ (· · · (d 1 ϕ Γ )). For our purpose, we have gen-
eralized the existing fact declaration mechanism towards arbitrary declaration
functions (cf. §3.4). Thus we may attach arbitrary SML values to a locale, which
will be transformed together with the logical content by morphism application.


4   Context-dependent simplification
Isabelle’s generic Simplifier [14] is already a non-trivial example of integrating
automated proof tools into our architecture of context data and declarations
(cf. §3). The generic proof method simp depends on a simpset container being
maintained as context data. A simpset roughly consists of a set of simplification
rules and simplification procedures (of type simproc), which are maintained by:
    add-simp: thm → simpset → simpset
    add-simproc: simproc → simpset → simpset
    Declaration of plain simplification rules (cf. the example in §2.1) follows the
general scheme of fact-declaration of §3.4. Here add-simp is wrapped into an
attribute called simp. Morphism application is trivial, since rules are theorems.
    Declaration of simplification procedures is more involved, cf. the example in
§2.2. A simproc essentially consists of a function morphism → term → thm
that turns a redex t into a theorem t = t 0. We introduce a derived declaration
“simproc-setup name (patterns) = f ” for patterns : term ∗ and f : morphism


                                         9
→ simproc, which roughly abbreviates “declaration (ϕ 7→ add-simproc (ϕ f ))”.
What does it mean to to apply a morphism to a function? We define:
    ϕ f = (ψ 7→ f (ψ ◦ ϕ))
Our main observation is that a function transforms itself by a given morphism.
The body will apply the morphism to all required logical entities, or pass it on
to other functions. To apply ϕ to f, we compose ϕ with any morphism ψ being
passed in the future. Actual evaluation in the present context is commenced by
invoking f ϕ0 (the identity morphism). Note that this scheme is reminiscent of
programming language semantics presented in “continuation-passing style”.

Tool-compliant morphisms. A well-formed morphism (cf. §3.3) guarantees sta-
bility of logical entities after transformation. Unfortunately, this is not sufficient
to achieve stability of arbitrary functions. For example, even with plain simpli-
fication rules alone, the Simplifier is not necessarily stable after arbitrary inter-
pretation of its context: although an interpreted rewrite system still represents
equational consequences of the original theory, it may cause the rewrite strategy
to produce unwanted results or fail to terminate.
    A morphism ϕ is called f -compliant iff ϕ f preserves the intended operational
behavior of f ϕ0 . E.g. for binary-sub defined in §2.2, tool-compliant morphisms
include those that replace bit, add, neg by rigid first-order terms, but not arbi-
trary λ-abstractions that destroy the shape of the term patterns involved.
    Morphisms stemming from locale import expressions [1] (type instantiations
and renaming) are usually tool-compliant. Substitution of parameters by con-
stants works equally well. Assuming that the tool is able to perform unification
of simple types at runtime, types may be even generalized here, e.g. replacing the
fixed α of locale ring-bin by an arbitrary β::c constrained by a suitable type-class
c that ensures the required algebraic properties. This means that the canonical
interpretation of locales as type-classes [9], where fixed parameters are replaced
by polymorphic constants yields morphisms that comply with such tools.


5    Application: Gröbner Bases
We use the techniques of §3 to integrate a proof-tool for (semi)-ring equalities.
The procedure follows the traditional refutation scheme: negate the input then
transform toVDNF and disprove each disjunct. Hence we consider formulae P
                n
of the form i=1 pi = 0 ∧ f 6= 0, where the p i ’s and f are polynomials within
semiring. Recall that we can turn several inequalities into only one. We use an
oracle to find a Nullstellensatz
                     Pn          refutation consisting of polynomials h 1 , . . ., h n
and a number k s.t. i=1 hi ·pi = f k . It is clear that by proving this last equality,
¬ P follows. The oracle computes a Gröbner basis [4] for the ideal generated by
the p i ’s and reduces f in that basis. The whole process keeps track on where
the S-polynomials originate from in order to express the final result in terms of
the p i ’s. This implementation has been ported from HOL Light [10], see also
[13, §3.4.2]. Note that this procedure also solves many problems in semiring,


                                         10
by dealing with p = q as if it were p − q = 0 and separating the “negative”
and “positive” parts of the Nullstellensatz certificate. This yields a correct yet
incomplete procedure, depending only on two axioms stated in semiringb:
locale semiringb = semiring +
  assumes add-cancel : (x ⊕ y = x ⊕ z ) ↔ y = z
   and idom: (w    y ⊕x      z =w     z ⊕x    y) ↔ w = x ∨ y = z
    We emphasize that our procedure proves results by inference: the oracle only
finds a certificate, used to derive the conflicting equation. The final equation
emerges by normalizing both sides, using genuine inferences. This approach also
allows to integrate other tools solving the detachability problem [13, §3.4.2] or
provide the construction information of the S-polynomials (as e.g. in AXIOM).

Context data. The method sketched above is essentially parameterized by the
operations and axioms of (semi)ring (in order to prove the normal form of poly-
nomials and recognize their structure) and by four non-logical functions: is-const
recognizes canonical ring expressions as “constants”, dest-const produces SML
rational numbers from ring constants, mk-const produces ring constants from
SML rational numbers, and ring-conv : morphism → term → thm produces
proven normalization results of numeral expressions.
    Following §3.2, the method reserves a data slot in the context to manage all
its instances. We emphasize that instances no longer depend on a morphism,
since these are applied at declaration-time, where the corresponding instance of
our procedure is computed. At run-time, when we have to prove P, we extract
a polynomial q occurring in P and try to find a corresponding interpretation
installed in our context-data. Afterwards it proceeds as explained above.

Using the proof method. The end-user sees an Isabelle proof method algebra,
that works for any tool-compliant interpretation of semiringb. The user only
needs to interpret the semiringb locale to activate the method in his context.
The default configuration includes interpretations of semiringb to “prominent”
types in Isabelle/HOL: natural numbers and the type-class idom, which covers
e.g. integers and real numbers. Here is a simple example:
theorem x ∗ (x 2 − x − 5) − 3 = (0::int) ↔ (x = 3 ∨ x = −1) by algebra


6   Conclusion
We have presented a system architecture that emphasizes the explicit context-
dependency of both logical and non-logical entities, with specific infrastructure
to manage generic data, declarations, morphisms etc. An interesting observa-
tion about context-aware proof tools is that there are three phases: compile-
time (when loading the sources), declaration-time (when applying morphisms to
transfer abstract entities to particular interpretations), and run time (when the
tool is invoked on concrete problems).
    Traditional “LCF system programming” directly uses features of SML to
abstract over theory dependencies. Our approach goes beyond this by providing


                                       11
specific means to organize the requirements of a tool. Thus the implementor is
enabled to build generic methods that are transferred automatically into the
application context later on. The end-user merely needs to perform a logical
interpretation of the corresponding tool context, without being exposed to SML.
    This integration of abstract theory mechanisms and proof methods is achieved
without changing the logical foundations of Isabelle; all additional mechanisms
are reduced to existing logical principles. Apart from these theoretical consider-
ations there remains the important practical issue to implement tools that are
actually stable under application of typical theory morphisms.




References
 [1] C. Ballarin. Locales and locale expressions in Isabelle/Isar. In S. Berardi et al.,
     editors, Types for Proofs and Programs (TYPES 2003), LNCS 3085, 2004.
 [2] C. Ballarin. Interpretation of locales in Isabelle: Theories and proof contexts. In
     J. M. Borwein and W. M. Farmer, editors, Mathematical Knowledge Management
     (MKM 2006), LNAI 4108, 2006.
 [3] B. Barras et al. The Coq Proof Assistant Reference Manual, v8. INRIA, 2006.
 [4] B. Buchberger. Ein algorithmisches Kriterium für die Lösbarkeit eines algebra-
     ischen Gleichungssystems. Aequationes mathematicae, 3:374–383, 1970.
 [5] A. Chaieb. Verifying mixed real-integer quantifier elimination. In U. Furbach and
     N. Shankar, editors, IJCAR 2006, LNCS 4130. Springer, 2006.
 [6] W. M. Farmer, J. D. Guttman, and F. J. Thayer. IMPS: An interactive mathe-
     matical proof system. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 11(2), 1993.
 [7] M. J. C. Gordon, R. Milner, and C. P. Wadsworth. Edinburgh LCF: A Mechanized
     Logic of Computation. LNCS 78. 1979.
 [8] B. Grégoire and A. Mahboubi. Proving equalities in a commutative ring done
     right in Coq. In J. Hurd and T. Melham, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher
     Order Logics (TPHOLs 2005), LNCS 3603, 2005.
 [9] F. Haftmann and M. Wenzel. Constructive type classes in Isabelle. In T. Al-
     tenkirch and C. McBride, editors, Types for Proofs and Programs (TYPES 2006).
[10] J. Harrison. HOL Light Tutorial (for version 2.20), September 2006.
[11] J. Harrison and L. Théry. A skeptic’s approach to combining HOL and Maple.
     Journal of Automated Reasoning, 21:279–294, 1998.
[12] F. Kammüller, M. Wenzel, and L. C. Paulson. Locales: A sectioning concept for
     Isabelle. In Y. Bertot, G. Dowek, A. Hirschowitz, C. Paulin, and L. Thery, editors,
     Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics (TPHOLs ’99), LNCS 1690, 1999.
[13] B. Mishra. Algorithmic algebra. Springer-Verlag, 1993.
[14] T. Nipkow, L. C. Paulson, and M. Wenzel. Isabelle/HOL — A Proof Assistant
     for Higher-Order Logic. LNCS 2283. 2002.
[15] L. C. Paulson. Organizing numerical theories using axiomatic type classes. Journal
     of Automated Reasoning, 33(1), 2004.
[16] M. Wenzel. Type classes and overloading in higher-order logic. In E. L. Gunter
     and A. Felty, editors, Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics (TPHOLs ’97),
     LNCS 1275, 1997.
[17] M. Wenzel. Isabelle/Isar — a versatile environment for human-readable formal
     proof documents. PhD thesis, Institut für Informatik, TU München, 2002.



                                          12
